On its own, data does not look like much.
Often it appears as a wall of unintelligible numbers.

However, if we take each number and assign it a shade of grey, suddenly
the data becomes understandable and the face of the monalisa stares out at us.

[colormap]
Shades of grey are not the only possible color palettes, though,
and many colorful alternatives exist, such as sinebow.
Some of these colormaps have been around for a while, with the widely used Jet first
appearing in the 1970s.
In recent years, a lot of attention has gone into addressing the shortcomings
of the early colormaps and creating better standards for the future.
Particularly, Jet was replaced by the proprietary Parula in 2014,
the open-source community countered with Viridis in 2015,
a research paper describing Cividis was published in
2018, and Google created Turbo as a less-radical, spiritual successor to Jet in 2019.

[why]
So, why were so many new colormaps invented in this 5-year period? How are these
colormaps created? Are they merely the favorite colors of their creators? How
can a colormap be interesting enough to be published in a science journal?

To answer these questions, we have to explore a bit of color theory.

[theory]
Visible light roughly lies between 400 and 700nm, and the colors we see
in the natural world are usually made up of a mixture of all these wavelengths.
For example, a lotus leaf might emit a complicated light spectrum like this.

[simplify]
Fortunately, our eyes will simplify this jumble of data down to just three
values. This is because there are three types of color sensing cones,
sensing short, medium and long wavelengths, and thus named S, M, and L.

All colors now have a position in a three dimensional space with S, M and L
as the axes. However, due to the overlap in cone sensitivities, this space
is quite awkward to work with and has lots of positions that do not match real
colors. For example,
this space has a position for the color that only stimulates the M-cone but no
light can stimulate that cone without also stimulating one or two other cones.

[xyz]
So, to make colors easier, the LMS space was stretched and
squeezed into a new shape, called the XYZ space. This space is equivalent to the
LMS space but its shape is much more convenient to handle.

[pyramid]
Taking a 2D slice of this space gives a pyramid of colors with reds to the
right, greens at the top, and blues to the left.
This space still contains non-sensible colors but we can filter them out by
mapping each wavelength of visible light over on to the pyramid.

[rgb]
While this shape represents all the visible colors, most computer monitors can only show
the subset of colors inside of this triangle, and all the colors outside of
this triangle are approximations.
Finally we arrive at a usable space of colors: sRGB.

[draw]
Drawing a path through the sRGB space gives us a colormap but it doesn't
guarantee that it will be particularly good. The sRGB colorspace captures
the physics of light but doesn't concern itself with how colors are perceived.
Blues are perceived to be darker than greens given the same number of photons,
and it's easier to tell the difference between shades of green than shades of blue.
These facts make it difficult to draw a path through the sRGB colorspace that
is perceptually smooth, meaning the rate of color change stays constant.
It is also difficult to draw a path that increases or decreases linearly in
brightness.

[hsv]
Fortunately, we can just invent new color spaces on top of sRGB that have
different properties. For example, the Hue-Saturation-Value space makes it
easier to draw paths that smoothly transition through hue and saturation.

[lab]
The HSV isn't perceptually smooth, though, and creating a smooth colorspace
took a lot of effort. Scientists recruited a bunch of subjects and showed them
countless pairs of colors, asking if they could tell them apart and which color
they thought was the brightest.
In the end, the scientists created the LAB colorspace: a colorspace that captures
how humans perceive color and brightness.

[made]
Parula is a path through LAB space that took so much work to create that it has
been copyrighted. Although what it means to copyright colors is anyone's guess.
Viridis was created using an even newer colorspace that more accurately maps
the human visual cortex.
Cividis was specifically designed for accuracy even when the viewer is
colorblind.
And of the new colormaps, Turbo is the only one that does not build on perceptual
smoothness, optimizing instead for high contrast.

[grid]
Looking at the colormaps side-by-side, we can get a better feel for strengths
and weaknesses.
For example, Turbo has a lot of contrast but that same contrast leads to distortions.
And Cividis, along with inferno and plasma, avoids shades of green since red-green
color blindness is the most common form.

Returning to the questions in the beginning of the video, I hope you have a
rough idea of how colormaps are created, the theory that underpins them,
and why they're still being developed to this day.

[end]
The full source code for this animation is available on GitHub and released into the
public domain.

THEEND
